[AUDIO LOGO]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Crystals and stones have
been used for many different
purposes throughout
human history.
Lapis lazuli,
carnelian, and malachite
were used by the
ancient Egyptians,
emerald by the Incas,
jade by the Chinese,
and turquoise by the
Native Americans.
Many of these
great cultures were
aware of the power
in the stones,
and they used them consciously.
Much of the knowledge
of the real purpose
of crystals in jewelry and their
use in and around the house
has been lost.
Few people know that
Aztecs traditionally
used certain gemstones
on the third eye
to help their consciousness
stay attuned to God
or that azurite was once used
by some Native American tribes
as an amulet to help the
wearer contact a spirit guide.
Crystals have been
used for thousands
of years as gatekeepers
at the entrances
of important buildings to
keep unwanted energy out.
Each crystal has a
special gift to offer
and can be utilized to become
a personal power piece that
will assist its
user in attaining
certain states of awareness
or achieving specific goals.
So what are the different
ways that we can use crystals?
How can we work with them
in our everyday lives?
And how do we even begin
to establish a relationship
with them?
>> There are several ways
to use crystals and stones.
Professional practitioners
do full treatments
placing stones on
their clients' body.
We as individuals can hold
them or carry them in a pocket
to touch during the day.
We can place them
around the house,
and we can make elixirs or
water to drink with them.
Perhaps most commonly, we
can wear them as jewelry.
Bringing in Chinese
medical theory
again when we wear
them as jewelry,
we also want to have a
reason for placement.
Is the ring on the index
finger or the fourth finger,
the right hand or the left?
Is the pendant hanging at
the center of the chest
or closer to the throat?
Energetic channels run
through the wrists and ankles,
so choosing stones that resonate
with a particular channel
is a consideration.
Generally speaking, women
should hold and wear
stones on the right side of
the body and men on the left.
The center of the chest is
a major acupuncture point.
It is the meeting point
for Qi in the body where
all the energy of the
body passes through.
It helps to relax the
energy in the chest.
A pendant worn over this
point will gradually
have a sort of filter
effect on the energy passing
through the area,
eventually influencing
all the energy in the body.
Wearing a necklace
or a pendant closer
to the throat, of course,
affects the throat chakra,
but wearing a
necklace as a choker
can also help clear inflammation
in the sensory organs.
The fingers have specific
channel associations,
and if we wear a
particular stone
on the same finger for years,
it affects the channel.
By Chinese thinking, because
the diamond is so hard,
it doesn't allow for
flexibility and resilience.
Wearing the typical
diamond engagement
and wedding rings
on the fourth finger
brings rigidity to a channel
that can ill afford it.
>> We can work with crystals
to aid us in our dream time
to have more vivid dreams or
to open up psychic awareness
and psychic gifts.
We can use crystals
for our environment,
lay out different grids.
They'll help anchor
energy within that space.
We can use crystals
to help us ground
because almost all crystals
are going to be coming
from that Mother Earth energy.
>> The first thing we need to do
with a crystal is to establish
a relationship.
We communicate
with the crystals,
so they inform us of what
they're supposed to do with us.
That's the work of a shaman.
When you communicate
with the stones,
they can tell you what they do.
It will tell you
why it's in life
and why it has
been given to you.
This is why we refrain
from buying stones.
Normally, in our
tradition, it's best
to receive the crystal
when it is given as a gift
or finding them in
nature when the Earth
itself gives them to you.
That establishes a real
sacred relationship
between you and the crystal.
I often feel that
there is a need
for more sobriety in
our work with crystals
when I look at what some of
the New Age practitioners
are doing.
Many crystals and
more crystals is not
necessarily better
than conscious sobriety
for several reasons.
First of all, we need to
realize the third principle
of working with
crystals, awareness of
and respect for the Earth.
There is often
quite a destruction
of the ecology that happens when
people are mining for crystals.
There is a common trap
that we also fall into,
mistaking outward
objects as substitutes
for our own inner work.
Chögyam Trungpa, a high
Tibetan tulku and lama,
coined this in the spiritual
saying spiritual materialism.
In fact, a crystal
practitioner can
work with a single stone, a
single clear quartz crystal.
He doesn't need
any more than that.
You can program this crystal
with all the attributes of all
the other stones and colors.
>> The best way to cultivate and
establish a relationship with
crystals is just to
get to know them.
Treat them like people.
If you want to get
to know somebody,
you got to work with it.
You got to have communication.
You work with the
crystals regularly.
You meditate with
them and maybe just
see how are they going to work
with you, your unique energy.
How would they like to be used?
What can they do for you?
So you have a conversation
with those crystals.
Work with them
regularly and you'll
get really familiar with them.
>> I recommend exploring the
belief that gemstones like
plants and animals possess a
unique form of consciousness.
I think they really enjoy
interacting with humans
as it brings them to life.
It gives them a very
unique sacred purpose.
One way to wake up the
power in a gem or a crystal
is to admire it.
Gaze into it.
Feel its beauty and its
power and then quietly
see what happens next.
>> It's not difficult to
establish and cultivate
a relationship with
a crystal or stone.
Since energy is
transferred through touch
or other interaction, it
almost happens automatically.
If you're attracted
to a stone, hold it,
look at it with a conscious
present state of mind,
and you're already
making relationship.
Over time, as you wear
or handle the stone,
the relationship will deepen.
With clear crystals such
as quartz or aquamarine,
gazing into and through them can
be a very interesting process.
This focus of
attention is certainly
a way of developing a
relationship with the stone.
Some stones are more
demanding than others.
Meteorite, for example,
can be challenging.
It is a stone from
heaven and wants
to bring our evolution
to a higher level.
If we haven't already
been cultivating
with meditation
or other methods,
it may give too strong a push.
Another challenging
stone is black obsidian,
which requires us to see
the dark parts of our self,
which can be very difficult. If
you gaze into a black obsidian,
do it only for a few
seconds because it really
makes you look into
your dark shadow self.
And then shift your
gaze to a clear crystal
to make the effect a
little less difficult.
>> What you use to communicate
with the crystal is what we
call telepathy.
Now that might seem a big thing,
but it's actually very simple.
All the animals are
always communicating
through telepathy.
When there was this big tsunami
in Asia there, lots of people
died, but all the
animals three days before
had gone up to the hills.
They weren't there because the
Earth communicated with them.
When you see the birds flying
through the sky when they're
practicing for migration, you
see them all change direction
at the same time.
That's telepathy.
And when the phone rings
and you know who's calling,
that's telepathy.
When you're with your loved
ones and you say the same thing
at the same time,
that's telepathy.
It's something
natural to everybody.
Of course, when we're working
as crystal practitioners,
we practice that.
We have exercises.
In one of the ways of doing
this that people when they're
in their conscious awake
mind don't succeed in doing
this is by sleeping
with the crystal
because that part of you that
doesn't believe these things
is asleep in the night and
that part of you that's
open to everything is
awake in the night.
So you'll notice that when you
sleep with a crystal, when you
wake up the next
morning, you don't
have the same
relationship with it,
there's something
that's happened.
And when you go to sleep, try
to hold it in one of your hands
and check where it
is the next morning.
So many stories I've
heard where the person
found the stone underneath
where they have pain.
It's almost immediate.
It's always close to
where there's pain.
The stone knows what
it's doing, and it'll
travel to where it needs to go.
So sleeping with the crystal
is very good practice.
>> Communicate with crystals
like you would communicate with
your higher self--
psychically, telepathically--
like when you pray
and you really mean it.
Meditating with a crystal and
having the crystal on your body
is a great way to connect
with their vibration.
It's important to allow yourself
to have a childlike mind
and be playful and to not second
guess the information that
comes in but to trust it.
Crystals support us
to do exactly that.
They enhance and help
us trust our intuition.
So make a practice
of it every day.
For example, you can
sit with a crystal
you're getting to
know, ask a question,
then journal whatever comes
up through automatic writing.
>> There is much folklore about
using gemstones as good luck
charms and to ward off
negative influences.
Using a ring as part
of a marriage ceremony
is one of the more
common ways gemstones
are used as talismans
in our society.
Talismans have the potential
of activating talents
and positive attitudes
within people.
A talisman's effects
come into full force
when the person
wearing it becomes
fully aware of its
psycho-spiritual properties.
>> Mythology abounds with
accounts of magical rings
and talismanic jewels.
I've read about rings which
rendered its wearer invisible
or had the ability
to extend one's
life with the aid of
seven magical rings,
changing the ring
every day according
to the day and the
planetary influence.
Talismans and amulets
are personal to me.
I have a necklace
with multiple amulets,
each with a significance.
how I received it, the
occasion, the story, the energy
are all aspects which
create meaning to it.
This is like my wearable altar.
It's bringing me
protection or empowering me
for a specific issue.
>> Talismans and amulets were
one of these things that have
been done especially
in ancient cultures.
They believed that
magical symbols and sigils
and geometries and
seals and so forth could
be inscribed into
certain materia,
and then as it was
inscribed into that materia,
it would anchor it
into the physical.
So it anchored these magical
properties of what it was they
were trying to
call in whether it
was an angelic energy or some
kind of healing force or a love
spell.
So rather than just holding
the intention in your mind
and hoping that it would
be attracted to you,
they brought it
down to the physical
through a magical symbol.
And then crystals, they would
inscribe it into the stone
because it was really
strong and enduring.
>> Amulets are usually a symbol
or substance that is believed
to convey protection.
There are many
stones that naturally
have the quality of protection
against many potential evils.
Amber, onyx, obsidian, black
tourmaline, and smoky quartz
are among them.
Any of these could be made into
a pendant or kept in a pouch
or pocket to protect against
falling, night terrors,
or dangers while traveling.
>> I personally have
altars all over my house.
For example, I have an altar
dedicated to my ancestors.
I have an altar for my vision
of healing Mother Earth.
I have an altar dedicated to
Mother Mary and the empowerment
of women.
I have an altar featuring
my beloved power animals.
Most crystals love to be
seen and be in the sunlight,
so I have crystals
on my windowsills.
I have crystals in my
plants with the intention
of supporting their growth.
I have a quartz cluster
on our coffee table
with the intention of bringing
in more light and harmony
and to clear negative energies.
Remember that energy
follows intention.
Our mind is so powerful
as it creates what
we will manifest in our lives.
So trust your intuition and
know that the crystals love you
and are here to support you.
After a house or land
clearing and blessing,
you can also place crystals
in the Earth on the four
corners of the land, or you
can even create a central altar
for the house to
anchor the energy you
want to invite into the house.
>> When we want to use
crystals around our house,
these can be a great way to
anchor energy in certain areas.
So, for example, in feng shui,
the ancient Chinese system,
they would use crystals in
particular sections of a room
to help enhance that
energy or to maybe catch
the light as it's
coming in and reflect
that light into your space.
Or if there was a negative
energy, according to the feng
shui system, they
might put something
else there to help ground
it and neutralize it.
So the crystals have been used
a lot in feng shui systems,
for example.
Another way that
you can use crystals
is put them in the
pots of your plants
because the plants
really love the crystals.
They're going to work
with that Earth energy,
but they also amplify
and sometimes you'll
find that the plants will
grow stronger and be happy
because they've got this
amplified energy coming through
from the crystals.
You can have a generator
crystal in your house, which
is going to be a bigger quartz
crystal, just clear quartz
crystal but one that's
really big and at least as
big as your palm and typically
as wide as your palm.
And then you can
do crystal grids.
You can lay out
the crystals just
to anchor that pure highest
vibrational energy of light.
And you would put them
in different directions,
for example.
There's different
grids that will
work with different geometries
and different purposes,
but the most basic would be to
put it in the four directions
to help balance the
directions of your space.
>> We can use crystals and
stones around the house using
the principles of feng shui,
which literally means wind
water.
It's a very sophisticated
system intended
to bring harmony to living
and work environments.
For example, if we want to
manage the energy coming
into our home, we
can fill a small bowl
with dalmatian
jasper to filter out
obnoxious or annoying
energy or in the bathroom
a bowl of brown
jasper to break up
negative accumulations or
maybe a fluorite sphere
to absorb toxicity.
One caution of placing quartz
crystals in the television room
or close to the computer.
Crystals amplify energy.
If you watch a lot of
action shows on television
or spend lots of
time on the computer,
the quartz crystals can
amplify the stress and tension
of the action movie
and otherwise amplify
the electromagnetic radiation
put out by the computer.
Instead, place black tourmaline
near electronic appliances
to help absorb the
energy coming off
the computer or the
agitation of action movies.
>> I have a lot of quartz
crystals in my home that
I've given certain jobs to.
I seem to have some
flexibility in choosing
what I want them to do for me.
Quartz feels like a very
flexible mineral in many ways.
Astrological gemstones
are a little bit different
in that they'll affect
certain areas of a person's
life no matter what, things
we can predict in advance.
So in some ways, the results
can always be predetermined.
However, even
astrological gems seem
to work better if we are
consciously working with them.
The best way to
do that is to get
really clear on what you want.
This is something I always ask
people when recommending gems.
What do you really want?
That will tell me not only
which gems they should wear
but will help them work
with the gem to make
these visions a reality.
I think it's really important
to remember that what we want
might not always show up in
the package that we expect.
Also what we think we
might want may not always
be what's best for us.
And if that's the case,
the gems will actually
manifest what is in alignment
with the greater good,
not what we are
most attached to.
When we get to a place where
our desires and the greater good
are in alignment and we're
wearing gemstones that
specifically target those
particular outcomes,
that's when the
magic really happens.
Another way to
maximize the results
of an astrological
gemstone is to put it
on at a very specific time.
Certain planetary transits are
more supportive than others.
So we can make the
most of the gem
by putting it on during a
muhurta or a specifically
chosen astrological
time to begin something.
It also helps to chant
planetary mantras when first
wearing a gem.
Mantras use sacred sound
frequencies in the same way
that gemstones use
light frequencies,
so when you combine the two, the
results can be very powerful.
>> To program a crystal, you can
literally place the termination
point of the crystal to
your third eye like this.
And you project your prayers,
your vision, your desires,
your intentions, and
you ask the crystal
to show you the answer of
whatever you're asking for.
Show me.
Show me, show me, show me.
Then place the crystal
with a termination pointing
outward from your third
eye and ask the crystal
to send your intentions
out into the universe.
Then place the
crystal on your altar
and be ready for messages,
meetings, or happenings
that will transport
the answer to you.
The language of the universe
is often humorous, unexpected.
A message may come to you
from an unsuspecting stranger,
or a book may fall
out of the bookcase.
You may have a prophetic
message in dream time.
There are no rules, but once
you project your intentions out
into the universe, know that
the crystal is your ally
and will make things
happen for you.
Prayers are real and the
intensity, honesty, and passion
of the prayer is what activates
the crystal and the universe
to work with you consciously
and co-creatively.
>> I will not work with
people who want to wear gems
for the wrong reasons.
I've had people ask
for gems for reasons
that I feel are manipulative
or out of alignment
with the greater good.
I've had people request
gems to get revenge
or to get out of legal trouble
when they were actually guilty.
I decline to serve these people
because at the end of the day,
we're in the karma business.
We're prescribing gems
to uplift humanity
on a frequency of goodness.
Astrological gemstones
can do a lot of good,
but they can also be harmful.
We have had many
instances of people
being prescribed the wrong gems
which is a challenge for me.
I don't like having
to go against what
somebody's guru
recommended for them,
but knowing how to
correctly recommend gems,
I've had to do it many times.
>> I'd like to teach you a very
simple consecration ceremony.
When you receive your stone,
the first thing you want to do
is purify it.
Once you've purified
it, you'll want
to go to the side of
a stream or a lake
where the waves
go over the stone,
and you leave it there
for at least 20 minutes.
The best is about two hours.
And then you take it
out and you look at it.
It's better on a sunny day, and
you say why are you in my life.
What's your role?
What's your mission here?
And then you wrap
it in red cloth,
and you put it on your altar.
And for 14 days in your
evening meditation,
you take the wrapping, you
bring it to your heart,
you commune heart to
heart with the crystal,
and you put it
back on your altar.
After 14 days, you do
another 14 days but this time
you take it out of the
wrapping and you take it
in your bare hand and
you put it to your heart
and you commune heart and
heart with the crystal.
And at the end of
the 28 days, you
go back to the running water.
You let it bathe-- that's
energizing the crystal--
and then you ask
the same question.
And by that time, it's
very, very, very clear
what that crystal is doing,
and you've imprinted with it.
You've imprinted
into the crystal,
you've consecrated the
crystal, and it will always
do that for you.
Whatever its role
is, that mission is,
you've got a friend for life.
>> As our experts
have described,
crystals can be used
in many different ways.
You can instruct a crystal as
your own magical power piece
either to call in blessings
or to protect yourself
from negative influences.
You can use them for
protection and cosmic energy
flow in and around the house.
And you can create altars to
channel specific influences
either in a work or living
space or on your body.
It all starts with communication
and cultivating a relationship
with these special beings
of the mineral kingdom.